Right so let's have a discussion
on utilising polymorphism to cast
and core methods differentiating
object type vs reference types.
I mentioned in one of the earliest videos in this course,
that Java is said to be a strongly-typed
programming language.
You declare variables as a particular type,
and you cannot change the declared type,
although it is possible to assign an object
to your declared variable that is a different type.
There are set examples like the following on screen
that are perfectly valid.
The first one; Assigning a String-Literal
to an object reference.
The second one; Assigning a String-Builder object
to an Object reference.
And in the case of the third one; A Literal-int.,
in this case the value of 10,
that gets boxed to an Integer wrapper
and then assigned to an object.
There are three examples of code that's perfectly valid.
But you cannot change the actual type
of the reference variable.
So following on from that third example,
if we added some code on the line after that Integer o3=10,
well that would produce a compiler error,
that's because o3 cannot have its type changed.
We also know that the compiler does some type checking
at compile time.
You cannot assign an object that is not a derivative
of the declared type to the variable.
In the first example, you cannot assign an object
to a variable declared of a type where there is nothing
in common between the types at all,
and that's the case there with the String-Literal
in Thread thread class.
In the second scenario, both String and String-Buillder,
are sub-classes of Char-Sequence.
However, String-Builder is not derived from String,
so therefore that code is invalid.
We've also seen instances where we think an assignment
should work but it doesn't.
The compiler won't let us do the following:
So we got a code there, short s = 10.
So far so good.
And adding 10 to s, given that it's a short,
should be a valid short value
because 20 fits nicely in the short's range
but the code, short s2 = s + 10,
in-fact won't work.
We know it will work it work
but the compiler isn't going to execute code
to figure it out for us.
The thing to remember is that;
Polymorphism occurs at runtime, not at compile time,
and sometimes we need the ability to force an object
into a different form of itself,
to produce the results we want.
We need this code to compile,
so we need a way to inform the compiler
to ignore some of its type-checking rules.
And we do this by using casting.
You can use casting in assignments, in expressions
and in passing objects to method calls.
Casting can go in either direction.
Down-casting is casting to a more specific type
from the defined type.
The down type must meet the 'IsA' criteria.
And up-casting is casting to the more generic type.
We will actually talk about casting and interfaces
in a future video on interfaces.
For now though let's create a new class
in our polymorphism project.
And the class name is going to be: Down-cast examples.
(keyboard typing)
So in this class that I've posted it in.
We've firstly got an animal class with a single method.
We've got two additional classes, Dog and Cat.
They both extend the Animal class
and each have a single method.
And moving down we've got this down-cast examples class.
Its got a main method but we will talk about it
a little bit later.
It's got three overloaded methods for test-animal
which you can see there.
Basically one for each of the classes we've defined above.
And also down the bottom area its got two methods
that specifically take a dog or cat
and print the dog or cat method.
Son let's actually run this and then we'll talk
about what's happening in the main method.
Okay, so there's the output.
And we go back up to our main method.
You see what we're doing there.
We start off by creating instances of Dog and Cat
but assigning into a variable of top animal.
But then creating instances of dog and cat
and assigning them to variables of the same type.
Recalling our pass-through methods on these
specifically typed variables,
we then try the over-loaded methods
with specifically typed variables.
Then we finish off try the over-loaded methods again,
this time with generically typed variables.
Okay then we can see the code there,
very basic for test animal.
And the output as you can see is on the screen below.
Now not more surpises there,
but the other thing that you saw on the code
is there's no casting either.
The methods execute using the reference types
we assigned the objects to.
When we assigned a Dog object to a Dog reference,
the call to the tests-Animal method used
the overloaded method with a Dog parameter.
And when we assigned a Dog object to an Animal reference,
the call to the test-Animal method
used the overloaded method with an Animal parameter.
Right, so what I'm going to do now
is I'm going to actually change the main method
and I'm going to paste some new coding
to replace the contents of that main method.
Alright so there's the code.
If you scroll up and take a look at what I've done there.
I've deleted the variable declarations'
specific Dog and specific Cat.
And instead, with our past-through methods before,
we're now casting our objects to the specific task
we know the objects to be.
And you can see the casting we're doing there.
One is thirty-nine forty, and forty-four and forty-five.
And if we run this code
the out outputs on the screen there
and its actually exactly the same as before,
this time using casting.
Alright, so let's finish the video
and in the next one we'll continue on
and we'll start modifying this code a bit more
and what happens when we reverse the cast types by mistake.
See you in the next video.